v1.0.0 - June 5th, 2023
-----------------------
* Added ability to read from stdin in ictcc and generated binaries by specifying
a filename of "-".
* Inherited attributes in an SDTS are now considered unsupported and trying to
use them will cause an error. Inherited attribute use can be enabled by passing
`--exp inherited-attributes` to ictcc, but it is unlikely to function properly.
* SDTS hook implementation functions can now return an error instead of just
panicking when something goes wrong.
* Disconnected dependency graphs in simulated SDTSs are downgraded to warning,
and only become error if there are multiple graphs that lead to the IR.
* Token classes can now be retrieved by class ID by using ByID() in the
generated frontend's token package.
* Generated frontends can now detect when they are being fed empty input and
will return a different error than just "unexpected end-of-text token".
* Codegen for binaries now clears old code before generating, preventing issues
from arising when new generation doesn't completely replace every file.
* Added integration testing framework in `tests` and example testing framework
in `examples`, both via shell.
* Significantly improved code style; replaced magic literals with proper
constants, removed many unused functions, and limited the exported functions to
only those necessary, among other things.
* References to loading a parser or other frontend components from 'cache' have
been completely removed.
* The environment variable `ICTIOBUS_SOURCE` may now be used to give an
alternate location for local Ictiobus source code when calling ictcc with the
`--dev` flag.
* Fixed lack of support for built-in IR types as args to `--ir`.
* Fixed error message for impossible attribute reference pre-check giving the
name of the attribute instead of the symbol it is on.
* Fixed referring to attribute that doesn't exist at translation time causing a
panic. Now it's a normal error.
* Fixed epsilon productions completely breaking parser generation. This fixes
the issue of SLR parsers being broken as it was the root cause.
* Fixed some generated token class variable names being generated as just "TC"
if relying on rune names.
* Fixed generated SDTSs not checking the error returned by Bind() while
initializing.
* Fixed SDTSs being applied in non-deterministic way. Now they will prefer
translating the left-most nodes of parse trees, preventing some nasty possible
use-before-set errors.
* Fixed (or removed) broken unit tests that were previously commented out.
* Fixed syntax error messages for token classes that start with newline
sequences. Before, they were pointing to the apparently blank end of line where
the token started, which while technically true, is next to useless for a human
attempting to read the error.
* Updated CLI flags for ictcc:
  * Added `-S`/`--suppress` and `-F`/`--fatal` flags to control suppression and
  promotion of warnings.
  * Added `--debug-sdts` to debug the FISHI SDTS.
  * Added `-P`/`--preproc` to output a preprocessed FISHI spec before it is sent
  to the frontend.
  * Added `-C`/`--command` to provide FISHI code via CLI args.
  * Added `-D`/`--dfa` to output the generated parser's deterministic finite
  automaton.
  * Added `-T`/`--parse-table` to output the generated parser's parsing table.
  * Added `--exp` to enable experimental features.
  * Removed `-p`/`--parser`, `--no-cache`, and `--no-cache-out` flags.
* Updated CLI flags for generated binaries:
  * Added `-S`/`--suppress` and `-F`/`--fatal` flags to control suppression and
  promotion of warnings.
  * Added `-s`/`--debug-sdts` for debugging the SDTS.
  * Added `-C`/`--command` to provide input source code via CLI args.
  * Added `-P`/`--preproc` to output preprocessed source intput before it is
  sent to the frontend. This is only included if the generated binary performs a
  formatting/preprocessing step.
  * Changed `-t` to `--tree` and made `-t` be the shorthand version.
* Improved documentation:
  * Updated README.md to actually have example uses
  * Added new ictcc.md file to serve as the complete ictcc command reference.
  * Added new fishi-usage.md file to give full tutorial on FISHI usage.
  * Significatly improved code docs.
  * Added this version history file.

v0.7.0 - April 20th, 2023
-------------------------
* Ictiobus is now self-hosted with a frontend for FISHI specs generated by
ictcc.
* Added the `--dev` flag to ictcc was added to make it look to local source code
for Ictiobus when it needs to refer to them during binary generation. The local
source is assumed to be where ictcc is executed from.
* The generated token classes are now put into a sub-package of the output
package, to allow hook functions to refer to it separately. This might be
changed in a later release.
* The import path for the generated frontend files can now be assumed by
checking for module presence in the directory that they are output to. Token
classes being a separate package necessitates this.

v0.6.1 - April 15th, 2023
-------------------------
* Diagnostics binary generation added. This binary contains a fully-functional
generated frontend and is capable of analyzing source written in the language
defined by the spec. Optionally, this binary can instead be instructed to
perform input simulation of the frontend instead of analyzing input files.
* All flags parsing now uses the spf13/pflag library for GNU-style options.
* Added new flags to ictcc:
  * `-d`/`--diag` for generating a diagnostics binary for a language.
  * `-f`/`--diag-format-pkg` and `-c`/`--diag-format-call` for handling
  preprocessing of analyzed source in the diagnostics binary.
  * `-q`/`--quiet` to enable quiet mode to suppress progress output and other
  supplementary output.
  * `--preserve-bin-source` to keep source code output when it is generated as
  part of creating a binary.
  * `--prefix` to set a prefix for all generated source files. Combines well
  with `--preserve-bin-source` for debugging.
  * `--tmpl-main` to allow specification of the template used for the main.go
  file in generated binaries.
* Updated flags for ictcc:
  * added `-v` as shortcut for --lang-ver
  * changed `--val-sdts-off`, `--val-sdts-trees`, `--val-sdts-graphs`,
  `--val-sdts-first`, and `--val-sdts-skip` options to `--sim-off`,
  `--sim-trees`, `--sim-graphs`, `--sim-first-err`, and `--sim-skip-errs`
  respectively.
  * changed `--pre-format` to `--debug-templates` to betta demonstr8 its
  purpose.
* The current frontend for FISHI is now implicitly trusted as valid and will not
have input simulation run on it; `--sim-X` options now apply to the language
being analyzed.
* Fixed test of non-deterministic output of
`grammar.CreateFewestNonTermsAlternationsTable` by adding additional possible
success conditions for flaky cases.
* Added additional checks of SDTS sections of input specs during spec
interpretation (`%%actions` section):
  * Specs can no longer define new attributes starting with `$`.
  * Attribute refs must point to an existing symbol in their action's associated
  grammar rule.
  * Attribute refs to terminal symbols can only refer to the built-in attributes
  `$text` and `$ft`.
  * Attribute refs to non-terminal symbols cannot refer to `$text`.
* Improved error reporting during checks of SDTS sections of specs.
* Fixed boostrap lexer error where attribute refs to terminal symbols were lexed
as `TCTerminal` instead of `TCAttrRef`.

v0.6.0 - April 3rd, 2023
------------------------
* The ictcc binary can completely parse an entire FISHI spec and generate a
frontend. Yay! 38D
* Testing compiler for running SDTS now is put in `.sim` directory.
* Fixed several issues with fishi.md spec.

v0.5.3 - April 3rd, 2023
------------------------
* Re-release of v0.5.2 but with ictcc reporting the correct version.

v0.5.2 - April 3rd, 2023
------------------------
* Panics in SDTS hook functions are now caught and reported as errors.
* Code generation can now build all components of frontend.
* Added flags `-tmpl-*` for specifying tokens, lexer, parser, SDTS, and frontend
template files to use instead of the embedded default.
* Added flags `-slr`, `-ll`, `-clr`, and `-lalr` to select generation of that
type of parser as opposed to simply trying them until one is found that works.
* Added `-no-ambig` flag to disable the generation of LR parsers for languages
that have an ambiguous grammar.
* Added `-hooks`, `-hooks-table`, and `-ir` flags for specifying type
information and connecting external code to the generated frontend.

v0.5.1 - April 1st, 2023
------------------------
* Code generation started with templates for tokens, lexer, parser, SDTS, and
frontend.
* Add new flags for meta info during codegens, `-pkg`, `-dest`, `-l`/`-lang`,
and `-lang-ver`.
* New flag `-pre-format` added to output filled codegen template prior to
running gofmt on it.
* Renamed `translation` package to `trans` to keep it short.

v0.5.0 - March 30th, 2023
-------------------------
* The ictcc binary can now convert a FISHI AST into a language Spec. Use the
`-s/-spec` CLI option to enable outputting it.
* First token of a grammar construct is now available to SDTS as the `$ft`
("First Token") built-in attribute.
* Various fixes to fishi.md.

v0.4.1 - March 26th, 2023
-------------------------
* Renamed FISHI `%action` directive to `%set` so there is less ambiguity between
`%%actions` and `%action`.
* Added shorthand versions `->`, `(`, `:`, and `=` for `%prod`, `%with`, `%set`,
and `%hook` respectively to FISHI.
* Added ignored tokens `)`, `,`, and `()` in `%actions` of FISHI for parity with
`)`.
* Improved error reporting for SDTS validation errors.
* Split hooks into map of strings to hook function which is then passed to the
SDTS.
* Release candidate for complete fishi spec in fishi.md.

v0.4.0 - March 25th, 2023
-------------------------
* Added new flags to ictcc binary:
  * `-a`/`-ast` to print the AST it reads.
  * `-t`/`-tree` to print the parse tree it reads.
  * `-n`/`-no-gen` to disable generation of the frontend.
  * `-p`/`-parser` to specify the CFF parser to use.
  * `-no-cache` to disable loading the parser from a CFF file.
  * `-no-cache-out` to disable writing the parser to a CFF file.
  * `-version` to print the version number and exit.
  * `-val-sdts-off` to disable SDTS validation, `-val-sdts-trees` to show the
  parse trees that caused SDTS errors, `-val-sdts-graphs` to show full dep
  graphs when they are broken, and `-val-sdts-first` and `-val-sdts-skip` to
  control which SDTS validation errors are shown.
  * `-debug-lexer` and `-debug-parser` to show additional output from the parser
  and lexer while reading FISHI input.
* Fixed dozens of mistakes in bootstrap grammar to be able to parse an AST.

v0.3.0 - March 24th, 2023
-------------------------
* Created ictcc binary which can read FISHI-containing markdown files and output
the resulting AST.
* FISHI language and component changes:
  * Full `ictiobus.Frontend` creation for bootstrap frontend split into own
  file.
  * Added initial FISHI AST to use as IR.
  * Completed initial implementation of FISHI SDTS and hooks.
* SDTS functionality is now validated by automatic generation of valid blocks of
source text which are then fed to the SDTS.
* Updated terminology referring to "SDD" to correctly refer to SDTS.
* `ictiobus.Frontend` now holds language metadata and debug options.
* Fixed unit tests and commented out harder ones to be fixed later.
* Frontend components can now be encoded to disk as bytes in "Compiled FISHI
Format" (CFF). Used for the parser to increase testing speed.
* Added CI validation of gofmt and test execution.

v0.2.0 - March 4th, 2023
------------------------
* Moved `fishi.go` into own sub-package, `ictiobus/fishi`.
* Split the bootstrap lexer, parser, and tokens from `fishi.go` into their own
respective files in `ictiobus/fishi`.
* Created stubbed bootstrap SDTS in own file in `ictiobus/fishi`.
* Added ability to 'prioritize' which token is lexed first.
* Rough fixes to how syntax errors display the source line they were found on.

v0.1.0 - March 4th, 2023
------------------------
* Moved entire in-progress codebase over from its origin as a sub-project of
github.com/dekarrin/tunaq.